# Journey into a World Less Traversed

Human beings come with a destiny into this beautiful world. Depending on the country, religion and the times in which we are born, the experiences we go through differ. Everyone is unique. No two things or no two persons are similar, cannot be similar. Some lives are event-less. Some are beds of roses. Some are full of struggles. A small incident may completely change the course of our life. Though these things are predestined, our approach towards such happenings can always be positive. 

I was a normal kid like any other child in an orthodox Indian family. Until marriage everything was as quiet as a calm sea, but little did we know that this was the calm before the storm. My husband and I were made for each other and were on top of the world. We were expecting our first child in a couple of months. Raghavun was born on one fine Deepavali day. Now, I am going to tell you a story of thirty two years.

Our life can be classified as before and after Raghavun’s birth. In world history, Jesus Christ's birth has such a great significance and the same is true with Raghavun's birth in our lives. Things changed. Can I say, changed for the better? Day 1…..Raghavun was born normal. Everything seemed normal. But, his inability to suck milk was one of the first signs of abnormality. We helplessly tried all possible means to make him suck milk. Finally, we had to feed him with an ink filler. That was not a cause for concern, or that is what our doctor said. Besides he was well fed, and slept peacefully most of the time for the first three days, just as any newborn would do. I didn't expect in my wildest dreams that many sleepless nights were going to follow. 

As is the tradition in all Indian families, I came back to my parents' place with Raghavun after spending merely three days in the hospital. The baby was awake at night and slept during daytime. That too was not a cause for concern because many babies follow that pattern. The older women in my family assured me that it was quite normal. I was pampered in my parents home and I ate well, as I was a feeding mother, slept well and my mother took care of the baby throughout. In life, we don't know what God has in store for us. Maybe for the first few months, God was preparing me to run for the next many years, the warm-up and preparation before the marathon.

Days passed. The first seed of worry was sown in me after two months when Raghavun kept crying incessantly whenever he was awake. I couldn't discuss my fears with my husband as he was away from us because of work pressures and we were yet to join him. When we are surrounded by people close to us, worries take a back seat. Raghavun was still an infant and I was hopeful that better days would follow. Four months passed like this and it was time I joined my husband.

During the entire period of the four months that I was with my parents, Raghavun didn’t show any special preference to me. On joining his father, he spontaneously got attached or attracted to him. He was always with his dad whenever he was at home and cried when my husband left for work. At first I wasn't too bothered by this behaviour. But as the days went by, it was becoming increasingly difficult to handle him. His sleep habits were still nocturnal. He didn’t sleep at all at night. We took turns and kept awake. Obviously I allowed my husband to sleep a little longer as he had to go to the office and I was a homemaker and stayed home. Though Raghavun slept during the day, we had to finish all chores before he woke up. 

Fortunately, by this time he had learnt to suck milk. He slept alone in bed. He didn’t expect me to put him to sleep. Even if he woke up, he would be lying quietly without searching for me. We had a joola at home and at nights he would sit on the joola and would want us to rock it. He loved that rocking movement. It calmed him. He would cry his heart out and get tired and sleep on the joola itself. Those days we never slept in bed. We would sleep near the joola holding its strings in one hand and wake up with a shudder when Raghavun woke up from his short fifteen minutes nap at night. Gradually this difficult and different routine started having an impact on our health and moods. 

At this point I would like to pause and tell young parents something. Never allow anything to come between husband and wife. Only if you stay united can you win the battle. Don’t start the blame game. When things go wrong, it is easier to find fault with others. We always have a pitiable tendency to think that others are responsible for our problems or misfortunes. This is not so. Moreover, solving the problem we are facing at the present moment is more important than analysing who or what is the root cause of the problem. Though that’s also necessary, the immediate thing we have to do is to strike a balance, get back to normal health, keep the mind a little more calm so that we can think of the next course of action.

All of Raghavun's developmental milestones were delayed: rolling over, sitting, standing,walking and so on. The difference was apparent, and even striking when we compared him with our friends’ children. Toys didn't amuse him. Instead he preferred to rotate round-shaped objects and he would keep looking at them for a long duration. He would lie on the bed, look at the fan and laugh. Giving him bath was not at all a problem. He loved water. Loved to spend time in the bathtub, splashing water. He didn’t like the company of other children. He hated their shrill, high-pitched voices. He also didn't like to be cuddled. 

Raghavun started speaking at the right time. That was the only thing which happened at the correct time. We were happy. But again it was short lived happiness as his speech was different. He used to parrot whatever we said. He couldn’t initiate a conversation and answer questions. His memory was very good. He could recite many slokas, sing all nursery rhymes without a single mistake. He was two years old by now.

We gave him all the vaccines. We visited the doctors for small occasional setbacks in his health in this two year period. Surprisingly, no doctor detected anything abnormal or different about Raghavun's behaviour, during these visits. We also got used to all these things and learnt to cope with Raghavun’s behavioural patterns. The only person who had some nagging feeling was……of course myself. I felt that something was not in place but didn’t speak about it because it was still a vague impression, a subtle intuition, and I couldn't exactly pinpoint what the difficulty was.

We made a few visits to our parents and in-laws' homes during this period. The elders noticed Raghavun's odd behaviour, but attributed wrong reasons for it. They said that we didn’t allow him to mingle with other children and we didn’t teach him to talk properly and many such things. As these accusations were blatantly false and lacked any understanding of the situation, we managed to stay unperturbed.

As if to make things worse, he suffered periodic bouts of high fever and urinary infections. This happened once every month and we treated that. He was very quiet when he was sick. The doctor advised us to go for a circumcision operation as a solution for the urinary infections. We did it when he was two and a half years old. He came out out of the operation theatre wailing  loudly as the anaesthesia that he was administered didn't have the intended effect on him. He spent two days in post-operative care and was discharged soon. This incident marked a turning point in his life.

After coming home, he completely stopped uttering even a single word. It was as if the divine Goddess of speech had abandoned him and retreated to her abode. His reciting capacities seemed to have vanished into thin air. What was earlier a lively gushing stream had turned into a trickle. A deadly silence descended. 

We felt sad. Even at that time we were more worried about his admission to schools. How would schools admit a child who didn't even answer simple questions? Such were the questions that troubled us, but never did we entertain any other doubt. In hindsight, perhaps our level of awareness of his peculiar situation was low. All children of his age group were being trained by parents to face interviews before admission into kindergarten. We were pensive and decided to see a doctor. I was a very light-hearted person till that evening.

We waited at the doctor’s clinic. We were called in after fifteen minutes. The doctor was a pleasant gentleman and had a way with children. He examined Raghavun and put many questions to us. As he processed our answers, his face became grave. We were anxiously looking at him. Every second that passed was like an eternity. He held my husband s hands and said, “Young man, you must be bold, I am going to give you some bad news. Your little son has Autism. Take an appointment with National Institute for Mental Health And NeuroScience (NIMHANS) and get it confirmed so that you can start therapy immediately without further delay.”  We looked at him sheepishly. It was the first time we had heard the word Autism and didn’t know anything about the condition or its seriousness. But from the doctor’s expressions we understood that something was seriously wrong with our child. I collected myself and asked him, “Doctor, can you please explain the condition as we are hearing this word for the first time?” My voice choked and was hardly audible.

The doctor then explained the condition: 

"Autism is a condition which affects the overall development of a child, especially  language and social development of the child. It is a "spectrum" disorder. Children with autism fall on a wide spectrum: some are mildly autistic, while others are severely autistic, and there is an entire gradation in between these extremes. Autism may or may not be associated with mental retardation. Some autistic children, also called autistic savants, possess extraordinary capacities to do few things. The causes for autism were not well known then, and continue to remain obscure even to this day. There is no cure either. Only by training could we bring about changes in them. Tremendous patience would be required to handle these children. Results would be slow. There are many characteristic features of autism. A child may have a few or all the features and the severity of the condition is proportional to the number of features. More the features, greater the severity. A complete cure is non-existent. The features remain well into adulthood and even beyond that, but definitely there will be improvement. People with autism will always need support."

This was the general outline of the condition given by the doctor. I felt as if we received a blow with every sentence the doctor spoke. He was kind enough to explain all that and assured us that we would get better guidance from experts at NIMHANS.