# Chapter-8: Silent Sibling

We didn’t want to make the mistake of putting Raghavun in a far-off school. It was difficult for me to spend most of the daytime outside home, come back and work at home. And we couldn’t send Raghavun alone either. Moreover, we had to look for a school for Karthik and adjust our timing to drop and pick up both the children. We started searching for a special school first. Madras is vast and though there were schools for special kids, they were scattered. And there was not a single school which exclusively catered to the needs of autistic children. Some autistic children may have the ability to enter mainstream academics, albeit with some difficulty, while others are not gifted with that ability. We tried to teach Raghavun what is normally introduced in kindergarten. He didn’t learn. Alphabets and numbers didn’t mean anything to him. Some parents deceive themselves. Don’t do that. In the counselling sessions experts easily find out the IQ of the child. So, in Raghavun’s case the school was only a place to learn self-help skills, better concentration and social skills but without which it was not possible to engage him in a useful manner throughout the day.

As in the life of normal children, schooling is important for children with special needs at least until the age of twenty. After that the school will itself send the young autistic adult out in order to welcome small children. Basically all rules applicable for other children hold good for the special children. Raghavun was already seven. Time and tide waits for none. We enrolled him in a nearby school for normal kids. They accepted special children because the headmistress was a kind lady and she believed that these children would benefit by mingling with other children. She had Raghavun in school for a few months and Karthik also went to Pre-KG in the same school.

Karthik was a very quiet, sweet child and would narrate what happened in school everyday. Initially things seemed okay. But, Raghavun’s odd behaviour started attracting the attention of parents and they complained to the teachers that they would withdraw their children from the school if Raghavun continued there. The Headmistress was so polite and with a heavy heart told us to search for a special school for Raghavun. The children also made fun of Raghavun and we could feel that it hurt little Karthik. The next academic year, Karthik got admission in a very good school nearby and we found a special school for Raghavun. The instruction was similar to special schools in Bangalore. In the formative years children learn very fast. Raghavun was crossing that period. Now he was a small boy. The improvement was slow and the self-harming behaviour continued. These episodes were becoming increasingly distressing because he was no longer a kid now. When a small child cries or misbehaves, people ignore. We expect older children to behave well and Raghavun's tantrums definitely made people turn back.

With a lump in his throat, Karthik told us one day that his friends asked him if Raghavun was dumb. He was fighting to control his tears. We felt too sad. Even at that time, he didn’t curse Raghavun or say anything against him. I make a special mention about this because siblings of special children sometimes start hating them because parents focus more on their brother or sister with disability. There was a natural bond between our children. We don't wish to take any credit for instilling these qualities in Karthik. He simply loved and accepted Raghavan. We too never thought that one child needed more care than the other. Of course all of us think like that, and know that it is the right thing to do. But good intentions have never solved the world's problems. Our actions must speak for our high ideals. Even in a stressful situation, we should not show more preference to one child and ignore the other. We shouldn’t do it even once. I am not suggesting we have to be on our toes at all moments. If our thoughts, words and actions are always aligned in a straight line, we can’t make such a mistake.

Now, we felt it was very important to educate Karthik. We spent a day and told him about autism, why Raghavun was different, how we diagnosed his condition, how our support would bring about a difference in Raghavun and all that. We also told him that it was no wonder that children of his age were curious and asked him questions. He listened with a lot of interest and attention. He understood what we spoke and also the unspoken pains. He has never become angry with Raghavun, never hesitated to respond to awkward questions about him, or share with his friends or anybody, any information about his brother’s condition. Be that as it may, Raghavun’ s condition certainly had some impact on him at this stage.

Karthik was a reticent, but happy child. Whether his reticence was a natural development over the years or a congenital trait, we don’t know to this date. Let me put it more clearly. He would speak to everyone but never initiated conversation. He would respond if some came and spoke to him, or if it was absolutely necessary. He made friends with children, played with them, but was still very quiet in his own group. He was not demanding, very calm and peaceful always, was ready to adjust to anything, did not complain about anything, anyone, was friendly with everyone around but enjoyed spending time with the three of us more. Our intuition suggested that he had a lot of potential and that it would manifest itself sooner or later. 

Luckily, most of his teachers and friends understood him. Few people did not understand him. Such people have often asked why Karthik was different from "normal" children of his age. Not autistic like his brother, and yet not "normal" enough. We have heard them saying that Karthik is introverted and that we as parents haven't taken any effort to bring him out of his shell. Their intentions may be absolutely pure but they do not know the exact situation. Better to be indifferent to all such things and do what you feel is best for both the children. We didn’t take any of these comments too personally. We loved our child. The second time I cried secretly after Raghavun’s diagnosis was when Karthik returned from school one day with a proficiency prize for Mathematics, in LKG.

<hr>
<span style="display:flex; justify-content: space-between;">
	<a href="index.html">Home</a></span> 

To be continued...