# Chapter-5: Therapy Continues

We were going to NIMHANS every month, and we were waiting for the next visit to discuss with the doctor about Raghavun's self harming behaviour. By then, he had hurt himself many times. Taking him out was posing problems. The phenomenon of autism is rare, so the number of children with autism is less. Consequently, the awareness among the general public is also less. This problem was even more pronounced about 30 years back. So, people used to look at us with curiosity, a few started advising, others laughed, some showed faces. In a single word, it was embarrassing. But, we ruminated over this. Why should we feel embarrassed? The so-called normal children let their parents down quite routinely in public places. Some kids are adamant and they cry to get things done. Parents take such behaviour as typical children's behaviour and call them smart. Here, little Raghavun didn't know what he was doing. It was not his mistake. Yes, we dropped our embarrassment, that day, that moment like a hot potato. The word was removed from our dictionary.

We had a longer session with the doctor. He said that self-harming was one of the most common features of autistic children. There are around eighteen features that define autism and Raghavun had almost all of them. The doctor gave a few words of advice. I can never forget them. Now, I am passing on what we learnt, to whoever is in need of it. When the self harming behaviour started, Raghavun was very small. It is easier to correct or bring these things under control when they are under ten. At this stage, we as parents would be physically stronger than our children. That's the reason the sessions start with early intervention and training. We should be strict, but not beat the children. We must somehow convey to them we are not pleased with their behaviour. Small positive reinforcement can be given for good behaviour. That will motivate them. Raghavun loves cakes. We used to keep small cake pieces ready. Whenever his tantrums were short-lived, we gave him a small piece of cake. We informed him why we gave him the cake. 

One thing that young parents should bear in mind is this: we must talk to them as we would talk to other children. They may not respond. That is perfectly fine. We won't have any clue if they understood whatever we tried to convey. That too is fine. Once in a while, we can skip giving any sort of reinforcement. Otherwise, there will be an excessive reliance on the reinforcements and they will start basing their good behaviour on the expectation of the goodies. When it thus becomes a habit, they would cooperate only if we give them something that they desire. And that may lead to a different set of issues. Conscious choices should be made at every step. Actually it is a very good learning which will help us in other spheres of life too. Reinforcement need not always be edible. It may be a drive, a small kiss or hug if they allow us to do that. Most children with autism hate to be cuddled. Training autistic children means doing just the right thing. Yes. No exaggeration. Just like walking on a rope with hands stretched not to lose balance. Avoiding something and overdoing something will both have consequences that are totally different in nature. 

The days passed. We didn’t give him any medicine, thanks to the wonderful team of doctors. They clearly said that medicines should not be administered unless the child has serious issues like convulsions. Again, it is God’s grace Raghavun didn’t have convulsions. But few children develop fits often and doctors prescribe medicine for such children. It is very important to monitor the child, make a note of such incidents and give medicine as per the doctor’ s advice without fail. If he doesn't have convulsions for the first fourteen years, it is good, the doctors said. We kept our fingers crossed and prayed that everything should go well.

Raghavun’s therapy continued and we were asked to take him to a speech therapist. I didn’t like or approve of the idea because I knew Raghavun had good vocabulary and he could speak, but didn’t do so for some reason. We also observed that when people forced him to speak he got tense. Post the circumcision surgery, he stopped talking and we expected and hoped he would resume talking again. In such matters, generally the intuition of the mothers will be correct. But Thiagu insisted that we took him to the therapist. Maybe it was because he didn't want to leave or ignore anything the doctors and therapists said without giving it a try. He couldn’t spend more time with Raghavun because of his professional commitments. So, he wanted to do whatever was possible. 

We tried speech therapy. The therapist was making sounds and tried to make Raghavun repeat them. It was of no use. He knew many words already. It was like teaching a grown up school boy the alphabets. We stopped the training after a few visits to the centre. Raghavun’s social interaction was poor. The doctors said that it would be better to put him in a special school instead of going for individual sessions. The idea was that he would spend more time away from home, see more people and would be engaged for a longer duration.

<hr>
<span style="display:flex; justify-content: space-between;">
	<a href="index.html">Home</a> <a href="Chapter_6.html">Chapter-6</a> </span> 