# Chapter-3: Acceptance

We left the doctor's clinic and drove back home in complete silence. I felt too numb to react. On entering home, I went inside the bedroom, closed the door and wept bitterly for about ten minutes. That was the only time I have cried in these many years for his condition. I then gathered myself, became a little calm, and came out to see my Thiagu's reaction. He was calmer. We looked at each other deeply and then at our sweet little child. As usual, he was enjoying the rotating movement of the fan and was lost in his own world. It was our first understanding that his world was different.

We spoke for an hour, trying to come up with a plan of action. These were some of the questions on our minds: what should we do next, when should we visit NIMHANS and the most delicate of all, how do we break the news to our parents and the first circle of family members. All the weaknesses that were weighing us down suddenly left us. We felt quite strong and understood that it requires tremendous strength of mind to face the future. The responsibilities increased several-fold and many other unwanted stresses we were carrying so dearly left us in a moment. I will explain them, as and when I talk about the different stages of our life.

Soon, we took an appointment in NIMHANS and met the chief doctor. Fortunately, NIMHANS was located in Bangalore. Raghavun underwent a brain scan and an EEG. We had to make quite a few visits to the hospital, for tests, getting results, and so on. By now we were sure about the results and only waited for confirmation and guidance from the chief doctor. The scan report said that he had bi-frontal atrophy and the doctors confirmed that he had autism. They gave a big list of dos and don'ts. We were asked to report to them every month. No medicines were prescribed, as it was not a disease but a condition.

We just kept quiet for two weeks as we needed time to digest the fact. We searched for books on autism from libraries as internet facilities were not available in those times. The first circle of family members were informed. They knew nothing about autism and the news shocked them. I was the target of their criticism. All of them felt that I was the cause of my son's condition. We tried to convince them that mothers are not the root cause of their children's autism. But all our efforts were in vain. Though we had a matured approach, at times even very close people made me feel guilty. The good thing was that, my husband and I never had any difference of opinion on this matter. We never argued, never quarrelled and ignored comments. Our only focus was Raghavun's improvement. 

Raghavun was three years old now and we tried for admission in normal schools. We took this approach because, from the books we read, we came to know that some normal schools took one or two special children like this and gave them additional attention and helped them to grow out of the problem. We were in Bangalore and the schools we approached politely refused him admission. So, the next step was to approach special schools and special educators. There was a developmental centre for exceptional children. We took him there and started training. It was on a one to one basis.  One teacher for one child. The fees for the training sessions was a bit on the higher side. Each session lasted for just an hour as the attention span for autistic kids is much lesser compared to normal children. As Raghavun was a small child, I had to sit with him throughout the session. Another reason why I was made to sit with him was that the training was as much a necessity for the mothers as it was for the children. 

It was only after I started going to the centre, did I come to know that there were many children with this condition, and that too with worse disabilities. I made many friends. The condition of autism was the common thread that ran through all our lives. Different roofs, but similar stories. We shared our experiences with each other. I felt I had a mission to fulfil and that my husband and I were the specially chosen couple. This may sound like hyperbole to some readers, but it is far from that. All that you need to do is to spend a day with my son to understand the truth behind this assertion.

I must say I started enjoying the sessions. When Thiagu returned home from office I had an interesting story to tell him everyday. Our world revolved around Raghavun. We woke up with a lot of hope with every sunrise, worked with Raghavun, taught him simple things, enjoyed the little improvements he showed. We started sleeping peacefully and got used to his sleeping pattern. Somehow we never worried that he was not like other children. We accepted his condition as God-given. When parents start accepting special children, the world will also do that. We had wonderful neighbours, friends who empathised with our condition and they were ready to extend any help.

<hr>
<span style="display:flex; justify-content: space-between;">
	<a href="index.html">Home</a> <a href="Chapter_4.html">Chapter_4</a> </span> 