# Chapter-9: Skill Development

Karthik did very well in school. We attended all parent teacher meetings and got good reports from all the teachers. He sang well, but was shy and never exhibited his talents. The music teacher spotted him and made him a part of the school music troop. He went to a few places along with the group to participate in competitions. His horizons widened. As the days passed his friends stopped bothering him with questions about Raghavun and loved him for what he was. When I helped him with his homework Raghavun used to sit with us and scribble with crayons in his notebook. For a year or so, six or seven of Karthik's friends came home in the evening and I was teaching them along with Karthik. It was a happy period. Raghavun was always around. And the great thing was that all those children started talking to Raghavun which made Karthik happy. We used to wait for evenings during that period. Karthik got promoted to secondary school and he didn't need our guidance anymore. What was taught in school was enough for him. He wanted to be on his own. We got ready for the next turn in the life journey.

Raghavun liked his school. But we were looking for some place near home and one of our friends told us about a place called "The School of Empathy". The school was run by a couple who had a special child. They were really empathetic. Though they didn’t operate under a big banner, they were very genuine. On our request, they came home, assessed Raghavun and agreed to admit him into their school. It was the best of all the schools Raghavun had attended till then. The teacher was Mrs. Rajalakshmi. Her husband Shankar provided all the support his wife needed in managing the school. Their son Raju was in the same school and Mrs.Rajalakshmi’s daughter was an occupational therapist. There were a limited number of children and the fees were less compared to other big schools with a banner. 

We went and saw the school. It was satisfactory. They had helpers and caretakers. They just did not bother to ask if the child was potty trained or any such question. They had so much confidence in their way of running the school and said that potty training children was also one of the things the school would take up. A positive approach to life, confidence, love, determination: Rajalakshmi was all these qualities bundled into one. Raghavun took an instant liking for madam Rajalakshmi. He loved to get ready to go to school. He spent about six hours at school and came home happily in the evening. We started sending Raghavun with a few children from the same school in auto. The school had a wonderful infrastructure and the madam took complete responsibility and said firmly that I shouldn’t come to school to drop him. That gave me three to four hours of free time and I could write, take music lessons, read and do a few more things which I wanted to do but had missed out on all those years.

Raghavun's training at home also continued. When children are young we should prioritise what should be taught first. Certain things can wait, while others can't. Making them as independent as possible is very important. Toilet training is the first and foremost skills that they should learn. Raghavun learnt it quite early and never wet his pants even as a child. He was never given bed-coffee. Without brushing and bathing he was not allowed to touch food. Till today, he doesn’t eat without brushing and bathing. Children need to eat on their own so that they get a sense of fulfilment. But most autistic children don’t like their hands becoming messy. We couldn’t make Raghavun eat with his hands from a plate. We gave a bowl and spoon. He gradually starting eating on his own. The school helped a lot in this regard. I packed his lunch. The teacher trained him. He also saw other children eating on their own. 

Autistic children can learn all life help skills. It will take time. We shouldn’t be in a hurry and give up. There were special children who were better than Raghavun. We should not compare. Even while raising normal kids we must bear that in mind. A child should be taught to beat his own records. That is the right way to set goals. Doing and performing better than other children need not be the goal. If a child beats his own records continually, one day he will be automatically better than his peers.

When this routine got fixed, we were advised to consult a psychiatrist because we missed our visits to NIMHANS. Though there was no medicine for autism, it was considered to be a problem which needed a doctor's consultation . We met the best psychiatrist in Madras. He was the person who gave us the real picture. Many schools we had visited before gave us hopes. They claimed that they would make him read and write and integrate him into mainstream normal schools and that he would lead a normal life and all such things. But this doctor clearly said that we both should become mentally strong to face what was in store for us. He told us that if we worked with him steadily and patiently, few features of autism may disappear in the long run. When we asked whether we should see him every month, he replied in the negative. He asked us to be moderate about everything, which we were already doing. That visit to his clinic removed many of our doubts. It became clear to us that Raghavun would have to be dependent throughout.

Again our planning started. We taught him to brush, to spit, suck, to jump, to run, to throw and catch a ball, to colour with crayons, to drink from a bottle, to dress and undress, how to behave while travelling in public transport, how to behave at social gatherings, how to eat in restaurants and many more things. Few things he learnt immediately. Others took as many as fifteen years and certain things he couldn’t learn at all. That doesn’t matter. 

For example, brushing, colouring, playing with a ball, dressing and undressing were skills that he learnt without any problem. Till today, he cannot jump or run. We taught him how to spit and suck from a straw for almost every day. He learnt this skill only when he was fifteen. He loves to travel. So he behaves well when we go out. He likes all modes of transport: bikes, autos, cars, buses, trains. There are few things to discuss here. Autistic children don’t like loud noise. They close their ears most of the time. Raghavun too does that. He closes his ears with pillows while at home and with hands while going out. It is their wonderful defence mechanism to escape from the jarring noise of the outside world. We must never try to prevent them from doing it because it will end up in a temper tantrum. Talking about travel, Private transport is always better as it is rather hassle free. It is good to teach them to use public transport but parents should be ready to face unexpected difficulties. These children don’t like crowds. If the buses or trains get crowded their restlessness increases. Sometimes they will insist on sitting near the window and if the window seat is denied it may end up in a tantrum.

There was a child in Raghavun’s school who would always stand and travel whatever be the vehicle. Even if there was a vacant seat he wouldn’t sit. As mentioned in the previous chapters, when the child is small, these behaviours may not look very serious. But with a grown up child, it is a problem. Unwanted behaviours should be checked at initial stages. Raghavun insists on sleeping in the upper berth in trains. If we don't send him to the upper berth, he will just push the person in the upper berth or disturb him. That may not be understood by most people. If possible, we can ensure that these children get a seat of their choice while making travel plans. If not, we must try to teach the child to adjust or simply wait for the day when he will understand. With experience, we will get to know the things on which we should not waste our energy. Some like taking risks in life. They are fighters. Some like smooth sailing. Both Thiagu and myself belong to the second category. Most parents of special children belong to this category. We always planned trips and outings well as far as possible. You can do it according to your nature.

<hr>
<span style="display:flex; justify-content: space-between;">
	<a href="index.html">Home</a> <a href="Chapter_10.html">Chapter-10</a> </span> 