# Chapter-13: Home Schooling

When the child, now a young adult with autism is at home, it becomes a full time job for the mothers. During younger years, when the child was at school, we would have had some breathing space. Now it will not be so. The boy/girl should be engaged in a productive manner, we will have our routine works, seeing and being with the mother alone may frustrate the boy which will lead to tantrums and we will naturally be hard pressed for time unless someone is there to help in every possible way. Few parents engage a caretaker. The age, sex of the caretakers and their background are all very important as these children are very vulnerable.

Raghavun cooperated well, got adjusted to the new routine. He sleeps for nearly nine hours per day. The rest of the fifteen hours, we had to plan. Make a time table for older children once they start spending time at home. The timetable should be good enough to allow some personal time for us and keep the child peaceful and active to the best possible extent. Think differently. Don’t take any stress. It is very very necessary that we keep good health and strong nerves to take care of our children. If needed, make changes in your sleeping pattern. It will be a little difficult in the beginning but it is better to learn. As these children are unpredictable it is impossible to sleep peacefully when they are awake and when no one else is around to take care of the child. Be ready to postpone anything to give yourself that break. Have the child with you and go about doing the daily chores. This has two advantages. One, you will save time and another, you give the child a chance to learn from you. Observing and learning may have more benefits than monotonous teaching. They don't know how to mimic when they are young but learn that as they grow. This went on for a few years without much changes. Then came the time for my husband’s retirement.

I was happy about that because I was really tired, physically with all the running around for so many years. The feeling that his father would be there to share my responsibilities was great. We were actually excited about Thiagu's retirement and waited for the day. So, the next phase of our lives started. Raghavun enjoyed his dad’s company a lot but there was a byproduct. He slowly stopped cooperating with me. We immediately sensed it was a cause for concern.. My husband had other responsibilities like taking care of his old parents and Raghavun didn’t want to be away from his father even for short periods and threw a tantrum every time Thiagu was away from him for a little longer. It was altogether a different atmosphere and routine for my husband and he was getting stressed out. He just couldn’t shift roles all of a sudden and took some online classes to keep himself active. On such days Raghavun felt he was ignored by his dad and started hurting himself badly as before. Anything followed for a week becomes a habit. It is more so with autistic children. They like routine. Changes to the routine upset them. To give an example when I used to take him to school, I had to take the same route. If I changed the route for some reason, it made him tense. So, it was very much understandable that his father's erratic schedules affected him. I knew Thiagu couldn't do anything about these things either. Raghavun associates only pleasant car drives, restaurant visits and outings with his father. His father is his hero. I made him walk, took him to school and made him do tougher things. So, now he enjoyed spending time with his dad, showed no inclination to walk, refused to do a few small regular exercises either with me or with his father. Every time we insisted, he behaved badly. 

We discussed, argued and that irritated him all the more. To train them or at least to plan, we must be quiet first. We just watched, noted down the frequency of his bad behaviour and decided to be firm about certain things even if it resulted in Raghavun’s self harming behaviour. We spoke to him also, without bothering whether he understood the situation or not. That helped. He understood that his cooperation and good behaviour alone made his father also happy. He started walking long distances with his dad, played with him, and went shopping with him. We too never forgot to reward him with a long drive.
Another very important thing. When these children are indisposed, when they have pains they are not able to express. They cry or remain irritable. Slowly we must teach. We must always try to see beyond appearances. Their erratic behaviour may convey something which they are not able to vocalise. Never get angry with the child. As far as Raghavun is concerned he is quiet when he is sick. His pain threshold is high. We have taught him a few things. When I have fever I tell him that I feel weak and am going to simply lie down. He watches me taking tablets. He doesn't give any trouble when he has small health issues and cooperates, takes medicine. Young mothers don't panic when the child has small problems like common cold and cough. Same time, always keep a watch because they are not verbal.

<hr>
<span style="display:flex; justify-content: space-between;">
	<a href="index.html">Home</a> <a href="Chapter_14.html">Chapter-14</a> </span> 