# Chapter-10: Autism and the Senses

Being the parent of an autistic child is a full time job. My husband and I had some bookish knowledge and I was desperate to understand how these children felt. At the right time, an advertisement appeared in a newspaper about a two months training camp for parents of autistic children. I immediately enrolled for the training. The camp was an amazing experience. From this big city, only ten of us enrolled for the first batch. I had the opportunity to meet many therapists, doctors and special teachers. They taught us many things, such as how the five senses work differently for these children. Here, I am sharing what I learnt from the training. I felt I entered a different world. The training sessions were just incredible and an eye opener.

First comes touch. Autistic children dislike being touched, cuddled. They keep a physical distance from human beings, pets. There is no use forcing them to shake hands and make them hug us and do all such things. It is not necessary either. Raghavun doesn’t like pets. They like the texture of some articles and it varies from child to child. Some like smooth surfaces and some rough ones. We had noticed Raghavun showing preference to few shirts and utter dislike to some other shirts. He would just remove the shirt if we forcefully made him wear something he hated. Till I attended the training, I was under the impression that it was a meaningless behaviour. No. He had his own reason to do that. He did not like the texture of that particular shirt. Since these children do not have the ability to express themselves using words, parents should understand what is not spoken. It is a blessing they at least show their displeasure by gestures and actions. We must respect that. Even if they are not able to demand what they want they can definitely convey what they don’t want. Few children like to get drenched in rain. Few other kids just don't step on wet surfaces. After the training I was elated as if I had made great discoveries.

Next, sight. Seeing spinning objects gives them a good feel. This is true with most children with autism and Raghavun is no exception. It is their world. Raghavun loves to lay on his back and watch the fan for hours together. He loves to watch the merry go round but is afraid of the ride. Apparently, autistic children see the hair in our head as separate strands. What we cannot see with normal eyes, they see. They don’t make eye contact. They never look at you but look *through* you. Never stop talking to them because they don’t look at you when you speak. They will be listening and all that you speak gets registered in their brain. We shall discuss more about this when we talk about hearing. The rules in the world of autism are different. If someone doesn’t make eye contact while talking, we feel it is disrespectful. With autistic people it is not so.
They do know colours. Schools teach colours and ask them to group same coloured objects together. Though these children know different colours, they are just not able to comprehend why items of the same colour should be grouped together. In Raghavun's case it is just an amusement, an activity to keep him engaged for a while, nothing more.

Raghavun knows the post boxes are usually red in colour. What I mean is that he knows and feels the red colour but doesn't associate the word red with the actual colour. When he sees a fire extinguisher somewhere, he identifies it as post box. But again, autism is a spectrum disorder and I have talked about children with Raghavun’s intelligence. There are children with higher understanding and intelligence who are capable of expressing colour preferences while choosing their dresses and belongings. Try to teach everything. If the child learns well, teach as much as possible. If he has difficulty do not torture the child and feel disheartened if he is not learning. It is like expecting a commerce student to do medicine. 

Next is smell. These children have a tendency to smell everything. They love good smells like all of us. Smell of perfumes, talcum powder, soaps, incense sticks, aroma of good food etc...I think they don't react when they smell something bad. Children who are not potty trained wet their pants and don't find the bad smell irritating and simply keep lying down or moving around. The moment they sense some good smell, they take the object to their nose to enjoy the smell. Obviously it is not socially acceptable behaviour. Sometimes they enjoy strong smells. More than this there is nothing much to tell about smell. Raghavan knows when sweets are prepared at home. He comes to the kitchen to check if he would be given something nice to eat!

Next comes taste. This particular feature is the same in autistic children as others. Like other children they too like cakes, chips, chocolates and what all children love generally. The difficult thing is autistic children won't mind grabbing the food item from others’ plates or even from the shelves of a shopping-store. They don't know how to wait. Even grown up children with autism don't understand when we ask them to wait even for a few minutes before food is served. They are ravenous about their favourite food items. We have to be careful in public places. Otherwise they may just run to grab the food and create a mess. Raghavun did this once in a restaurant. We have been careful ever since. They are connoisseurs of good food in general and don't make a fuss about eating anything that's served. Some eat with a spoon only, some with their left hand. If you wish to teach them to eat properly, do it early. Teach daily. As eating is part of the daily routine we don't have to take extra strain to teach this. Let them eat with the other members of the family. They always hate noise. During outings it is better to avoid crowded restaurants. Making them wait for food, that too in a noisy place will end up spoiling the pleasant day out. We avoid choosing a table where small children are close by. Actually we are scared to do that even now. We never go to a restaurant where food is served on porcelain plates. Raghavun handles them well, even better than us but when something triggers him he may just push the delicate items and break them. I said in earlier chapters that we had dropped embarrassment. But we can't create problems for people around us either.

Finally and most importantly, hearing. These children listen to sounds differently. The least noise we hear sounds like the beat of a drum to them. That's the reason they always close their ears. That's the reason they avoid children. That's the reason they get agitated if they happen to be around some people who quarrel or make a lot of noise. This particular feature creates a lot of problems. We live in a noisy world. While going out we can't do anything to protect them from the noise of horns made by vehicles and all other external sounds. For that matter, even at home we can't create a soundproof atmosphere. Raising our voice is enough to scare them, irritate them. There is no other way but to take some precautions so that they remain calm. We should expose the children slowly to some of these things. Touch, sight, smell and taste concern the child only. But hearing has a connection with the outside world. It is Impossible to create awareness in everyone. Rather we can try teaching our child to cope with everything.

In the two months of training, we learnt how people with autism feel. These are the results of long research made with many children with autism and of course after many interviews with their parents. For everything, there are exceptions. There are about twenty important features that define autism. A child may have one, few or all these features. Raghavun had it all. As the child grows, few features may disappear. Training helps a lot in bringing certain behaviours under control. At first we may have to take some pains to bring order. Success comes slowly. We should take tiny steps. Order will become a habit after some time. If our children are called special children, we are special parents too. As they need special training, we need more order, patience, regularity, punctuality, perseverance… everything. But that doesn’t mean we should be serious all the time, keep a long face as if we have lost something. Life is a celebration. We must enjoy it. We have an additional responsibility of thinking and living for two persons. So, our spirit should also be twice as that of others. 

<hr>
<span style="display:flex; justify-content: space-between;">
	<a href="index.html">Home</a> <a href="Chapter_11.html">Chapter-11</a> </span> 