# Chapter-2: The Diagnosis

All of Raghavun's developmental milestones were delayed: rolling over, sitting, standing,walking and so on. The difference was apparent, and even striking when we compared him with our friends’ children. Toys didn't amuse him. Instead he preferred to rotate round-shaped objects and he would keep looking at them for a long duration. He would lie on the bed, look at the fan and laugh. Giving him bath was not at all a problem. He loved water. Loved to spend time in the bathtub, splashing water. He didn’t like the company of other children. He hated their shrill, high-pitched voices. He also didn't like to be cuddled. 

Raghavun started speaking at the right time. That was the only thing which happened at the correct time. We were happy. But again it was short lived happiness as his speech was different. He used to parrot whatever we said. He couldn’t initiate a conversation and answer questions. His memory was very good. He could recite many slokas, sing all nursery rhymes without a single mistake. He was two years old by now.

We gave him all the vaccines. We visited the doctors for small occasional setbacks in his health in this two year period. Surprisingly, no doctor detected anything abnormal or different about Raghavun's behaviour, during these visits. We also got used to all these things and learnt to cope with Raghavun’s behavioural patterns. The only person who had some nagging feeling was……of course myself. I felt that something was not in place but didn’t speak about it because it was still a vague impression, a subtle intuition, and I couldn't exactly pinpoint what the difficulty was.

We made a few visits to our parents and in-laws' homes during this period. The elders noticed Raghavun's odd behaviour, but attributed wrong reasons for it. They said that we didn’t allow him to mingle with other children and we didn’t teach him to talk properly and many such things. As these accusations were blatantly false and lacked any understanding of the situation, we managed to stay unperturbed.

As if to make things worse, he suffered periodic bouts of high fever and urinary infections. This happened once every month and we treated that. He was very quiet when he was sick. The doctor advised us to go for a circumcision operation as a solution for the urinary infections. We did it when he was two and a half years old. He came out out of the operation theatre wailing  loudly as the anaesthesia that he was administered didn't have the intended effect on him. He spent two days in post-operative care and was discharged soon. This incident marked a turning point in his life.

After coming home, he completely stopped uttering even a single word. It was as if the divine Goddess of speech had abandoned him and retreated to her abode. His reciting capacities seemed to have vanished into thin air. What was earlier a lively gushing stream had turned into a trickle. A deadly silence descended. 

We felt sad. Even at that time we were more worried about his admission to schools. How would schools admit a child who didn't even answer simple questions? Such were the questions that troubled us, but never did we entertain any other doubt. In hindsight, perhaps our level of awareness of his peculiar situation was low. All children of his age group were being trained by parents to face interviews before admission into kindergarten. We were pensive and decided to see a doctor. I was a very light-hearted person till that evening.

We waited at the doctor’s clinic. We were called in after fifteen minutes. The doctor was a pleasant gentleman and had a way with children. He examined Raghavun and put many questions to us. As he processed our answers, his face became grave. We were anxiously looking at him. Every second that passed was like an eternity. He held my husband's hands and said, “Young man, you must be bold, I am going to give you some bad news. Your little son has Autism. Take an appointment with National Institute for Mental Health And NeuroScience (NIMHANS) and get it confirmed so that you can start therapy immediately without further delay.”  We looked at him sheepishly. It was the first time we had heard the word Autism and didn’t know anything about the condition or its seriousness. But from the doctor’s expressions we understood that something was seriously wrong with our child. I collected myself and asked him, “Doctor, can you please explain the condition as we are hearing this word for the first time?” My voice choked and was hardly audible.

The doctor then explained the condition: 

"Autism is a condition which affects the overall development of a child, especially  language and social development of the child. It is a "spectrum" disorder. Children with autism fall on a wide spectrum: some are mildly autistic, while others are severely autistic, and there is an entire gradation in between these extremes. Autism may or may not be associated with mental retardation. Some autistic children, also called autistic savants, possess extraordinary capacities to do few things. The causes for autism were not well known then, and continue to remain obscure even to this day. There is no cure either. Only by training could we bring about changes in them. Tremendous patience would be required to handle these children. Results would be slow. There are many characteristic features of autism. A child may have a few or all the features and the severity of the condition is proportional to the number of features. More the features, greater the severity. A complete cure is non-existent. The features remain well into adulthood and even beyond that, but definitely there will be improvement. People with autism will always need support."

This was the general outline of the condition given by the doctor. I felt as if we had received a blow with every sentence the doctor spoke. He was kind enough to explain the condition in detail and assured us that we would get better guidance from experts at NIMHANS.

