# Chapter-7: Love What You Do

Things were moving slowly and steadily. But, we had to work more. When parents were taking their children to normal schools in one direction, I would be walking in the opposite direction to the special school, carrying Karthik, holding Raghavun's hand and with a packed lunch bag. I felt some self-pity and before it turned into a deep routed depression, I collected myself quickly with Thiagu’s support. He used to say that winners always stand apart and that we are born to win, to be different from the masses. I believed every single word of his statement and derived enormous strength from it.

Young fathers and the family should be understanding and supportive. The child stays in the mother’s womb for nine long months and mothers always think that the child is an extension of their own self. However brave a girl may be, she will be under great emotional stress during the formative years of the special child. If the other family members are able to empathise with the condition it is good. Otherwise, they should at least refrain from passing derogatory comments and from being judgemental. With passing years the family members may understand the condition better. But the initial years are crucial and any unkind remark about the child during these years will leave a permanent mark in the parents' heart.

Now coming back to our story, we would wave happily to other children going to normal schools in the opposite direction and they would return the gesture. There's definitely a power above us which plans and organises everything. I call it God. You can call it nature or give it any other name. There were things I loved to do. Many things….For the first time, it dawned on me that it's better to enjoy what I was doing than doing what I loved. There is a world of difference between the two attitudes to life. Enjoying the present moment, riding along the peaks and valleys of life without being ensnared by the distant hopes of the future gives a sense of contentment. Not being able to do the few things we like creates stress. We shall choose, choose to enjoy the present moment.

I used to entertain the hope of putting my engineering degree to some use. This hope started fading away. I was born to be Raghavun's mother and was not born to be an engineer. All interactions with my classmates stopped. When I learnt about the success stories of my friends, it didn't incite jealousy, but it did kindle a desire to take up some activity or the other. But this line of action was simply unthinkable then and remains that way even now. I was startled when I heard someone saying that my degree was a waste. There are things beyond our control. And we were too preoccupied with Raghavun that such comments failed to evoke any reaction in me. Young mothers, be bold. Never cry. None can hurt you without your consent. Never underestimate your strengths. At the same time, don't have a very high estimate of yourself because you are doing something different. We should just be natural and spontaneous in our actions. Everybody has problems. Different problems. That’s all….

My identity became "Raghavun's mother" to such an extent that a lot of parents in my social circle didn't know my name! This attitude has its advantages and disadvantages. It assists in the growth of a certain detachment from small things, what we call trifles, but we might end up losing interest in life if this tendency gets the better of us. We should not jump to the wrong side. It is always good to remember the "middle path of the Budha". To stay motivated, we must love life with an energy that doesn’t get depleted. There must be something that replenishes our reserves whenever they go down. 

Our attention was equally distributed to our two children. Outings were rare. Karthik spent his evenings only with Raghavun, and tried to play with him. Raghavun was seven and Karthik three. Thiagu wanted to take up a better assignment in Madras. I liked the proposal because it is a Tamil speaking city and we felt that being exposed to Tamil, his mother tongue, both in school and in the neighbourhood would accelerate Raghavun’ s progress. My parents were in Madras and we expected that to be a great support. Last but not the least, there was a big jump in Thiagu’s salary. A small, but important digression at this stage regarding financial matters.

Autistic children might outgrow their condition, but the number of autistic adults who become sufficiently independent to earn their livelihoods constitute an extremely small percent of this population. So, parents should make hay when the sun shines. They have to earn well to give a comfortable, peaceful future for the child. I don’t mean that we should aim for an opulent life and make the acquisition of money our prime preoccupation. At the same time, we shouldn’t miss good opportunities either. In India, the man is the breadwinner of the family and the woman supports him. This scenario has changed considerably and women of this age earn on par or even better than men. In the case of parents of autistic children, there must be a clear division of labour. Among the two, one should earn and the other should take care of the child. Only then will the quality of life will be good. If both parents are too ambitious and leave the child with caretakers or even with grandparents, the child suffers. There are some insensitive fathers and families who put the blame on the mothers. I have seen fathers who leave the wife and child. That’s a separate chapter.

We were doubtful if Madras had as many special schools as Bangalore. I categorically declared that I wouldn’t budge an inch without knowing about the situation of special schools in Madras. Before Thiagu resigned from his previous company, we made a few trips to Madras and found the condition to be satisfactory. We bid goodbye to Bangalore with a lot of memories, pleasurable and painful. We felt at home at Madras with our parents, in-laws and relatives around to extend help when needed. The next phase of our life started. Staying positive and extracting good opportunities from any difficult situation is very important for parents like us. Let us enjoy the beauty and fragrance of the rose and ignore the thorns. My husband joined duty. He loved the job, and earned a little more. But, does anything come in life without a price? We paid the price. Thiagu spent more time at the office and the quality-time we had in Bangalore started diminishing gradually. We can never have the cake and eat it too!

<hr>
<span style="display:flex; justify-content: space-between;">
	<a href="index.html">Home</a> <a href="Chapter_8.html">Chapter-8</a> </span> 